So my name is Maximiliano.
I can go by Max, this is going to be
a workshop on vanilla JavaScript and
why most of the time sometimes,
maybe you don't need the library
that you want to use so hard.
So really quickly about myself.
So I'm a mobile web developer.
So I have been doing HTML and
web apps since 1995 so the 96 actually.
So that means that I've been using
vanilla Js for a while because we
didn't have libraries or
frameworks like we have right now okay.
So I will during the day I will explain
my experience doing a lot of web apps but
roughly in terms of vanilla
JavaScript web apps so
with different screens single
page applications and.
And routing state management properly
I have done more than 100 web apps for
different devices like even restricted
devices such as mobile phones.
Even before the iPhone era, so
really restricted phones and
even smart TVs.
And then I have started doing mobile apps
as well, so I'm also a mobile developer.
And I have authored a lot of books, you
can see there with a lot of translations
and a lot of workshops and courses.
So even here frontend masters you
will find several workshops and
courses that I have developed.
So I'm third on Twitter on many social
networks on my website is further depth.
And I'm from Argentina I currently
live there so I'm from Buenos Aires.
So what we're going to cover today so
we will be focusing on vanilla JS if
you don't know what that is give
me one minute just one minute.
But anyway that's actually working
with the browser's API and
JavaScript without libraries, okay.
And we will explain why we want that and
when maybe because I'm
not here to like being a really
fan of vanilla JS for everything,
but at least you will see that
many times it's a good idea.
So we're going to talk about the DOM API.
So the DOM and the DOM API, sometimes
it's where you're coming from libraries,
such as React or Angular.
And that's the only thing you know,
the DOM API looks a little scary.
The DOM API,
the one I don't want to deal with that.
Okay, we will deal with it,
that will use the Fetch API.
That's probably something that you know,
because it's currently available unless
you're doing only Angular, where you have
HTTP services there that will help you.
Probably if you're coming from react or
view or other libraries,
you probably have to
deal with the Fetch API.
We will see different design
patterns am not here to advocate for
one specific design pattern.
So we will like mix and match different
design patterns on the same web app that's
typically not the case in the real world
you pick like one design pattern or two.
So but here we are going to
mix a couple So you will get
a sense of different ways that you
have with Vanilla JS to do things.
So we are going to create a single-page
application from scratch.
The only thing that is already there for
you is HTML and CSS.
So we're not going to deal with that.
We will be focusing on JavaScript and
making that app work.
We will talk about web components and
we will code web components.
So we will see the standard
way to create components.
If you're coming from a library, probably
you have heard the idea of a component.
Okay, we're going to see how the standards
work today in most of the browsers.
Routing, so we're going to see how
to do routing without React router,
[LAUGH] without a router
module from your library.
So we're going to just use the DOM API.
You will see it's not so complicated and
how to do reactive
programming in JavaScript.
So things that we love frameworks and
libraries.
If I change my state,
if I change the value of my variable,
the UI will update automatically.
So we're going to see how to do
that with plain JavaScript, okay?
So that's what we're going to
cover during the rest of the day.
So prerequisites on that url, firtman,
that's my last name .github.io/vanila,
okay?
You will find step-by-step guideline
if you wanna follow along.
The workshop, also there you have
the slides, a copy of the slides
in case also you wanna follow along or
you wanna download that for later.
Later I will get into that URL and
we will see where we are on each step.
Also by the end of the day on that URL,
you also have the final code working code,
okay in case you wanna get it later, okay.
Anyway, we are going to maybe 85% of
the workshop will be live coding.
The rest will be slides on some theory,
really theory but
explanations and discussions.
For the coding part, I will be
pushing updates on GitHub as well,
in case you want to follow along.
So questions, yes, please.
For those of you here, go ahead.
Just ask any question, even if you feel
it's a very basic question, go ahead.
>> Manipulating the DOM all the time
seems like not very productive,
especially when building large apps.
What's your opinion?
>> Let's say that scalability
is one of the things that scare
us the most when we are dealing
with vanilla JavaScript.
So we need to understand how you're
manipulating the DOM because as
I mentioned before there are many design
patterns to actually work with the DOM.
And let's say that the simplest
way to manipulate the DOM,
it's probably not performant for
large scale applications.
That is like for those of you that
already know what I'm talking about,
it can be just like changing innerHTML.
Things like that may not scale well,
but we have to understand also that
libraries and frameworks are not
changing the browsers and shine.
So they're actually executing
the same JavaScript as we can, right?
So we can also write things
with scalability in mind, and
sometimes even simulating what libraries
are doing to make them more performant.
So some people think that
libraries are magic and
yeah they're not they're using
the DOM API's behind scenes.
And they're adding design patterns
to make that things better and
you maybe for your case,
one specific library is better.
So I'm not here to tell you that you
must use Vanilla JS for everything or
you must manipulate in the DOM
directly for every project.
But after you understand at
least where are the API's?
What are the possibilities?
So these you can make a decision, okay?
I don't wanna reinvent
the wheel in this case.
So I'm going to use that library,
which is fine.
But the problem is that when you make
a decision without the knowledge,
you just use the library because that's
the only thing you know okay, so
that's my take at this point.
Okay, but I've done web apps,
as I mentioned before,
that are fairly large
maybe in terms of screens,
let's say let's measure this
in different kinds of screens.
It was like a game.
In terms of a screen, it was I think
around 80 different screens with forms and
drag and drop and everything.
That was an app with 10 million users and
it was working fine.
Didn't have any issues in terms of
scalability and yeah, at one point you may
think that I have created my own framework
and yeah, maybe that's the case.
Okay, maybe I created like a custom
framework for that specific project.
Yeah that may be the case for
some situations okay?
That's my take for now.